Hi everyone, James here. Welcome to this week's episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, where myself,
Andrew and Dan Shriver are joined by none other than our very, very, very good friend and colleague,
Ann Miller. Now you all know Ann, she's been on the podcast many, many times, but the one very
important thing to tell you about her today is that she has a brand new book out. That book is
called Mickey and the Trouble with Moles. It is an amazing children's book all about this secret
group of animal spies. And the amazing thing about this book, well actually two really cool
things about this book. Number one, there are secret codes hidden in the book that you can solve
while you're reading it. And number two, even more excitingly for me, I have a cameo in it.
Page 106, I'll admit, it's not a huge cameo. It's just one of the characters alludes to someone
called James. But I am assured by Ann that that refers to me. So this is very exciting for me,
the first time I have ever been in a work in fiction. But guys, honestly, I can't tell you
enough how great this book is. It's called Mickey and the Trouble with Moles. Stephen Fry said of
this series of books, they're brilliantly funny, ingenious and deliciously addictive. And if that
doesn't sell you on them, I don't know what will. Apart from hearing Ann on this week's episode of
Fish. So with no more ado, it is time for this week's No Such Thing as a Fish. On with the podcast.
Hello and welcome to another episode of No Such Thing as a Fish, a weekly podcast coming to you
from four undisclosed locations in the UK. My name is Dan Schreiber. I am sitting here with James
Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray and Ann Miller. And once again, we have gathered around the microphones
with our four favorite facts from the last seven days. And in no particular order here we go.
Starting with fact number one, and that is Ann. My fact is that Moles burrows have special
kitchens where they keep up to 470 decapitated earthworms to eat later.
470. It's very specific. That's the most they found. There could be more. We just...
It's absolutely, it's like a giant larder, right? Yeah.
Where they can go into for a nighttime snack. Yeah, they need to eat a lot. So they eat about
60% of their body weight and worms every day. And their burrows are really intricate. They have
special rooms for sleeping, for giving birth, and for storing their food. So it's kind of like
having a kitchen or a larder or a pantry. But it's, well, it's not to my taste, but it works for them.
Yeah, I think 470 is quite a lot though. It's like they're panic bought earthworms, isn't it?
Yeah, that's pandemic purchasing, isn't it? They know some of it's going on. Hang on.
They've got special rooms for giving birth in. They can't use those very often.
Well, we have those as well, Andy. And we, and you wouldn't put earthworms in the same room, Andy.
It's very health and safety problematic. Completely, completely, completely. But all I'm
saying is that if you've only got a certain number of rooms in your home. Oh, but they've got loads.
Yeah. Oh, okay. To have a specific maternity unit room in your house. I don't have that in
my house. I've got a kitchen and a living room and a bedroom. But if you were a mall, like so malls
can dig up to 20 meters of tunnel a day. So you've got a whole borough of them and they're all digging.
You could probably add an extension on pretty quick. Whereas if you're adding it to your house,
Andy, imagine it would take you more than a day or two probably. Yeah. Especially if it was just you.
The neighbors would have a few issues, no doubt. I love the way that they catch the worms. One of
the ways they do it is they dig a tunnel and the worms just fall into it. That's how they get so
many. Just wait for it. Of course. Exactly. Imagine you're a worm just kind of going around your
daily business sort of burrowing in the soil and suddenly just fall into a massive hole of your
enemy. And then you get put in a larder with all your dead friends. You see all your friends say,
yeah. But here's a quick question. So I was reading that they stored the worms and there was a
suggestion in what I read is that they've immobilized the worms with a bite to the head. So they're
still alive. They're not dead yet. They may be brain dead, but they're sort of fresh because
they're still living. So is that right? They're not actually dead in that larder. Yeah. I think it's
more, it's kind of like putting them in a fridge, but it's like a living fridge. Yes. So the worms
aren't going to go off. They can eat them later, but they also can't get away. It's very good. I
think they can get paralyzed by, like you say, I think they can get paralyzed by being bitten at
the back of the head, which kind of stops them being able to wriggle around. But I think that
moles might also be kind of poisonous or venomous as well. There's stuff in their saliva. I think
there's many different types of moles, but yeah, I think there's saliva can do stuff as well. I think
that's right. And I think shrews are the same. And there's this kind of toxin called blarina toxin,
especially in shrews, but I think in moles as well. And if they bite humans as well,
then you can get a little bit of a bit like a bee sting or a wasp sting. You might get a bit of
swelling around. So they are quite, you know, they're venomous. Well, just on being bitten by moles,
moles are really, really strong. And there was a belief in the 18th century that if you held a
mole in your hand until it died, your hand would acquire healing power, right? Okay, so if you
just kind of cup it in your hands. Now, the problem is they're so strong. There's a mole expert called
Mark Hamer, and I read an interview with him. And he said that moles are stronger than people.
He said that if you picked up a mole and help, yeah, don't shake your head, James. It's true.
If you pick up a mole and cup it between your hands, even if you are really strong, like even
if you're a manual labor or something, it will be able to burst open your hands and get that.
I know what you mean, Andy, but I don't want to be one of those 7% of men who think they could
beat an elephant in a fight. But I do think that I might be able to beat a mole in a fight.
But well, you'd have a really hard time finding one, though, because we very rarely see moles,
because they're pretty fast and they're mostly underground. And actually, in 1967, there was
a guy called Peter Stafford, who won the World Life Camera Man of the Year Prize. He took a photo
of some mole and it's young in a burrow. And for 40 years, that was the only photo we had of moles
in their burrow with their young. And then the reason they got changed was in 2012, Springwatch
were like, well, this is a challenge, let's film the moles. But they got Peter Stafford back to
help them do it. So he is like the guy for filming moles in their burrows. They're very mysterious.
Have you guys heard of Mollology? No. So this is a thing that's been coined by a guy called
Jesper Ehrman. And he's an archaeologist who basically made an application to the Danish
cultural agency to say we want to use moles to help us do our archaeological digs. And the idea
was that if you have moles burrowing down into potential sites where you believe there to be
hidden cities, in the digging, the stuff that comes to the surface might have shards of pottery or have
little elements of these bits of archaeological brick or whatever. And so he's dubbed it Mollology.
And they do the work for him. So they don't have to sort of desecrate the area and potentially ruin
ancient sites. Do they not think that like ancient Egyptians were just all eating earthworms and
stuff? Is that? But that's happening in the UK as well. There are moles basically working at a
site in Cumbria. It's an old Roman forge that's protected. So you're not allowed to dig there
if you're a human. Moles are not bound by such rules. And so there are a whole team of human
volunteers whose job it is is to go through the molehills and find out what they've basically
turfed up as they're digging. And so far the moles have found pottery, beads and my favourite,
a decorative bronze dolphin, which makes me think they're like, I'm not putting that in my burrow.
Send that up. That's really good. Yeah, I prefer their original name sort of circa 450 to 1100 AD.
And well, you're very old school then. Yeah, and I would appreciate it if for the rest of this
segment we could refer to them by their original name, which was and it's very nice. The idea, Andy,
as you say, of holding a mole in your hand because they used to be called wands. Oh, you had a wand.
Yeah, W-A-N-D. And a wand eventually turned into a wand. So they became a wand. And the molehills
used to be called a wanty-tump. They were not called that. Damn, was that? Back in the day,
you would be making a mountain out of a wanty-tump. All right. That's fantastic. Let their name before
they were cool as well. Dan's got the original molehill data. Another thing about moles is they
got really fast reactions. So the star nose mole actually has the Guinness World Record for being
the fastest eater on the planet. So it can basically locate a snack, eat it, and then move on to looking
for its next one in 230 milliseconds. The average, the fastest one was 120 milliseconds. And for a
comparison, it takes humans 650 milliseconds to respond to a red light traffic light. So they
are fast. They are fast. They look insane, by the way. If you've never seen a star nose mole,
give it a Google. It's the most alien-looking creature. It's a sort of, it's like it's halfway
through eating an octopus, and it's just stopped with the legs hanging out. That's what's on its
face. The rest of it's very mole-like and then suddenly alien on the face. It's very magical,
actually. That organ on the front of their face is 12 times more sensitive than a human clitoris.
Wow. I don't know what to say about that. And it's a lot easier to find as well.
That's so good. Oh, so, mole-catching. I'm sure you guys have been reading about the massive
feud in the British mole-catching community. Okay. No, I don't like this. There are three
British bodies. It's so stereotypically British, devoted to catching moles. There's an association
of British mole-catchers, there's the British mole-catchers register, and there's the guild of
British mole-catchers. Splitters. Well, they had this huge feud in 2016 because Anne Chippendale,
which is the name of the woman who is in the association of pro-mole-catchers, she accused
Louise Chapman, who's the head of the British register of mole-catchers, of being an embarrassment,
in quotes. This all happened in the pages of the Wall Street Journal for no good reason.
No idea why. Not the Mole Street Journal.
Why? I think I've got better things to report on. Clearly, they just wanted a bit of sort of
exotic colour from weird backwards Britain, and so they just wrote about this mad feud they were
all having. And there's this huge debate about whether you should check a mole trap every day,
because that's more humane, or whether you should check it only a few days, which is, you know,
could leave a mole in distress, but might also, you know, you've got to drive 50 miles to get
to your next bloody trap. And so there are there are ructions in official pro-mole-catching circles
at the moment. Wow. Yeah. Wow. I'm not actually a member of any of those. I prefer the underground
stuff. Well, you are going for it, James. Look, I've been away for a week. I feel like if I don't,
then you guys are going to replace me with Jamie full-time. Speaking of Anne said earlier that
they had really good reactions. And that's why we have the thing called Whack-a-Mole. That game,
you know, where the moles kind of pop up and then you whack them. So this was invented in Japan in
the 1970s. It was called Magura Taiji in Japan. And in 1976 and 1977, it was the second highest
grossing mechanical arcade game in both of those years. It was absolutely massive. It was huge.
Really? And for people who don't know it, the moles pop up like these little furry things,
then you hit them with a mallet. And every time you hit them, you get a point and then they drop
back down into their holes. But a lot of people in video game academic circles refer to Whack-a-Mole
as the first violent video game, basically. So, you know, when you're talking about how maybe
Grand Theft Auto is turning us all into, you know, carjackers and stuff, they really can
shake it all the way back to Whack-a-Mole, which was the first of these games.
Right. That's really interesting. I've played Whack-a-Mole like at a seaside,
fairly recently, obviously not in the last year or so. But it wasn't moles. It's always like sort of
cylinders that sort of pop up. So maybe that was an attempt to sort of separate it from
cruelly bashing the moles, even though it's still called Whack-a-Mole.
I think maybe it was. Because if you think about it, like, you know, Whacking moles,
people say, oh, video games, they don't make you do that. But there are three societies in Britain
dedicated to catching moles. So that's evidence for you straight away.
I think we need a follow-up of which arcades they visited as children.
But yeah, there are some others like Whack-a-Banker and Whack-a-warden, kind of like new versions
of them where you can attack some people with unpopular jobs in the future.
Right. The Versailles Palace in France, famously, has its own mole catcher and it has had for 330
years. Okay. Well, they certainly had in 2012, which was when I read an interview with the Versailles
catcher, Jerome Dormion. And he signs off all his text messages with 'Mole Catcher to the King',
completely ignoring the fact France no longer has kings. They literally dealt with that situation.
But basically, Versailles obviously is so neat. The gardens are so pristine and the
lawns are so gorgeous that he has to keep 2,000 acres free of moles.
How does he do it? Does he have like a little mole guillotine or?
Genuinely, he uses a guillotine style trap. No.
Genuinely, he actually does. Wow.
And he is very lucky to be in his work because in the old days, he wouldn't have had a chance
because from the 1600s until 1812, all the mole catchers came from the Liard family,
all the royal mole catchers. And there's a story that the last one was a bit of a rake,
bit of a scallywag and basically turned the official mole catchers residence at Versailles
into, you know, a knocking shop. It was a brothel. And one day, as Napoleon was walking in the
gardens at Versailles, a prostitute came out of the mole catcher's house and propositioned him
and said, "All right, bone apart, fancy a good time." And as a result, the family was stripped
of its ancient privilege after 150 years of mole catching. Wow.
Yeah. What a rollercoaster. What a mole coaster.
What a way to lose your family inheritance of so many years though, just one prostitute.
Every time someone asked you to repeat the story as well, you'd get the full name. It was something
cooler. So I really love reading about moles, but also obviously there's moles in the human
world. But in terms of the word mole, meaning a double agent, that pretty much comes from John
Le Carré's books. And he has sort of said like some of the words he took from the world of espionage
and some of them he made up himself. And there's a bit of confusion over which ones are which,
because obviously things are secret and which things are coincidences and which
things are definite. But according to the Oxford English Dictionary, they basically say it was
very rare to use it. I mean espionage before the Cold War saw writings and they cite John
Le Carré as one of the very first people to use that. And as well as coming up with the word
mole, he also came up with honey trap that came from Le Carré. That wasn't something we used
before. And he also had to run the past any character names, had to run them past the foreign
office to make sure he didn't accidentally dobbin any real active agents, which I thought was
kind of cool. And then in the BBC interview, they asked him if he did the same thing with
Dragan and he was sort of like, no, but I try and you know, I have more fun making up my own words.
Well, so Anne, you've written a couple of kids books about espionage in the animal world. Did
you have to run and you've got friends in GCHQ, I know that happened to know that. So did you have
to run those names past the? I'm not allowed to comment on that. And is there a honey trap in
your book? No, there is not. It's for children. Okay, cool. It could be an actual trap of honey.
If you're trying to trap Winnie the Pooh, for example. Okay, it is time for fact number two,
and that is Andy. My fact is that in 1800, a wig maker in London patented mechanical whiskers.
Great. Yeah, amazing. Are we talking cat or human? Human, which is nice. Oh, yeah, not the cat food.
No, not the cat food. God, this is a semantic nightmare, this one. Basically, this is from an
article by an expert on beard and wig history, a guy called Alan Withey, who discovered in his
researches a patent that a London wig maker had taken out. And it was in a time when beards were
reasonably fashionable. They hadn't had huge heights, which was later on in Victorian times,
you know, the mid-19th century. This is the year 1800. But there was a London wig maker who had
made a contraption, or patented at least, a contraption, which had fastenings made of a certain
elastic compressed steel or springs. It was basically so you could attach a beard to your face with
metal and make it look really convincing. Yeah, it would make it kind of almost flap a little bit
in the weather. Well, that was the worry, wasn't it? Because people who were obsessing with trying
to wear fake beards were taping them to their face or gluing them. And if a big gust came,
their beard would fly off mid chat and suddenly a naked face would be talking to everyone. And
that would not be seen as a good thing. I spoke to Dr. Withey this morning and what a great guy he is.
And he said that it was almost like you could buy this wig and then it came with like optional
extras. And so he said that the mechanical whiskers were almost like the go-faster stripes of the
wig world. So you would buy your normal car, but you would add the go-faster stripes or you'd buy
your normal wig and you would get these extras that went alongside it. Cool, right. That's so cool.
He's an amazing guy. I'm so excited that you got to talk to him because his website,
his blog on beards, and he's got a book out as well. It's just fantastic. And one of the best
things about him is a man obsessed with beards. He doesn't have a beard. Well done. I spoke to him
on FaceTime today and I can tell you that he does have a beard though. Well, he's buckled then.
He's buckled. Well, during lockdown, decided to grow a little beard. Fair and nice. Looks very cool.
What kind has he got James? Well, for him, like during lockdown, the rest of his hair kind of fell
out. He doesn't know why, but the one, the bit that's left is kind of a mustache with a goatee
beard at the bottom. Okay. By the way, his website, we should just say it is Dr. Allen. It's Allen
spelled the Welsh way. So that's A-L-U-N-D-R-A-L-U-N dot wordpress.com. And like Dan said, it is an
amazing website with everything you would ever want to know about beards. It's incredible. Yes.
So does he have his beard if it's a mustache with just the goatee bit at the bottom? Is that a bit
like Iron Man's, you know, Robert Downey Jr. Is it like that? So not like yours, James, connected.
Yeah, I think that's right, although I can't obviously remember people's faces.
James has a, for the listener, James can't remember any faces. So I'm questioning this whole
Dan, you're just like, because you've been scooped on your return.
But that's supposedly called an anchor, that type of beard. And I think James, you have a goatee
which the way you have it, that might be a circle called the circle beard. Is that right? Yeah,
there's so many different types. And he brings up all these old types from the 19th century,
particularly, you know, some beards were called soup strainers and others thai ticklers and the
Piccadilly weepers. But I obviously, I don't know if you can tell this is a video call. I currently
have not got a beard, but apparently in the 1800s, it was also quite fashionable for women to fasten
their hair under their chin to imitate the look. So I might try that next time I'm hitting shops,
see if it goes down well. Exactly. I spoke to Alan with you about this and he said that he found a
few kind of advertisements for women to buy hair products for their beards, but they were usually
like, you got ringlets instead of sideburns, they would kind of get those growing down or sometimes
would even draw whiskers onto their faces because they wanted to follow the latest fashion. I mean,
it must have been an amazing time, maybe the best time ever for beard owners, the 19th century,
because people just went tonto for them. So the really big era of beard fashion was kind of that
middle of the century. And supposedly, it was starting with Crimea, the Crimean War, soldiers
grew beards, because it was very, very cold. And he just wanted a little bit of, you know, facial
protection. So that then all the obviously 1856 Crimean war ends, soldiers come home, they're
conquering here. Well, I can't remember who won the Crimean War. Anyway, soldiers go home,
that's the main point. And they've all got beards. And that's an argument. There's a book from 1854
actually called The Philosophy of Beards, which said that beards could keel sore throats, or that
if you shaved off a beard, you might get rheumatism and lots of other ailments because you don't
have this protection anymore. I read that book for a little while. And it's not the whole thing.
Alan with these read the whole thing, I'm sure. And the author of this book says,
you might be thinking, why don't women have beards? If beards are so great, and the author is saying
beards are really, really great. Yeah. And he wrote, well, look, women naturally have longer hair,
but also women were never intended to be exposed to the hardships and difficulties men are called
upon to undergo. So I think the idea is that, you know, the men are out hunting mastodonts or whatever
it is, men are out hunting. And you need a beard to hide behind if there's no bushes or anything.
Exactly. Exactly. Love this as a man who clearly hasn't heard of a scar.
There is a theory that came out quite recently, isn't there, that beards evolved so that if people
punch you, it kind of lessens the force. Do you see that? That's amazing. So this was quite a recent
study. And the scientists, what they did was they took a skull. And obviously you can't get a skull
with a beard because it's a bit late for growing a beard by the time you're a skull. You can't
really do it. And so what they did was they took a load of hair from a sheep and then wrapped it
around the skull to kind of be almost as if it's a bit like a beard. And then they pummeled the skull
with this iron rod dropping down with different weights to work out how much of a force it could
take. And they worked out that actually the one which had the sheep's fur on it could take a lot
more force than the one without. Right. I mean, that's an amazing experiment. But also, what a
bunch of weird perverts these sites are pummeling a skull wrapped in hair with a rod. Also, you don't
see many boxers with beards, right? Like, you figure this new research would change literally the face
of sport. I wonder if it's in their rules. Like, you know, they're very sort of like what kind of
things you can have if you're a cyclist, if you're a boxer, maybe it's like you can't wear a beard.
It's like, oh yeah, or maybe it's like a real woossy thing. There's not all the good in with his beard
softening the punches. Like giant six foot beard. That's a cushion all the flow. Well, that was the
thing with beards, wasn't it? It was like that they were supposed to be like a side of manliness.
And apparently that was because they were almost seen as a waste product, a beard. It was like the
exhaust pipe of sperm production. So if a man was making lots of sperm, then this was almost like a
waste products of the sperm making would be the beard that came out. And that was the theory behind
why, you know, the more masculine men would have beards. Well, I didn't think you would say anything
of this podcast more disgusting than your weird sheep experiment. The exhaust pipe of sperm production
is pure nightmare. For me, it was the stardnosed clitoris earlier.
But back to sort of spies and espionage, I read a really good thing. There's an argument that
prisoners shouldn't be allowed to have beards because if you escape and you've got a beard,
if you shave it off, it's a pretty good disguise. But if you're a clean shaven, to make yourself
look different is much more elaborate. It would take much longer. Wait a minute, can you not just
grow a beard then the other way around? You'd have to be hidden for quite a while, I think,
if you escaped and you come in with your beard. They catch you 10 minutes later,
unless you're making a lot of testosterone. Yeah, you can't just go into a phone box and
wait in there for a week and then come out. Famous convicts, Burmy Pete, actually managed to
avoid recapture every time he escaped. So one really interesting thing, actually, on that,
which Dr Withie said to me, which is that it's quite easy to know about posh people's beards
from the olden days because lots of people had paintings and stuff like that. But what did normal
people have in their beards? Did they wear beards? Did they have different styles and stuff like that?
No one really knew because we don't have those kind of records. But what Dr Withie decided to do
was to look at prison photographs, which they did have from the 19th century. And what he found was
that they kind of like to have this beard that you don't really see anymore, which is almost
like a chin strap. So it comes down the sideburns. It goes down the bottom of the chin, underneath
the chin. And there's no mustache or anything like that and nothing on the cheeks. I tried to
look at other people who had it. I think Henry Thoreau, maybe, or Stormzy, if you can think of
either of those two people. Yes. It's that kind of beard. But you don't really see it around anymore.
But that was really, if you look at the prisoner photographs from that time, they all had this
kind of beard. So it seems like if you're a lower class person, that's the beard you would have had.
But if it's really thin lines, that means presumably it's quite a lot of upkeep to have
that. So you would probably have taken quite pride in that. It's not just like you just let it grow
and it became bushy. That's deliberate. That's kind of what Dr Withie was saying. It is strange
because you actually have to work at that. You can't just let it grow and that's what it does.
You actually have to put some effort behind it. So yeah, it must have been a fashion.
That to me seems a bit also like protection because you know that fact about cravats
coming about as a result of wearing a bit of scarf around your neck might disguise where your
actual neck is in war and if a knife was coming. Imagine if you had a very bushy beard just in
front of your neck if you're in prison. That's almost like where's his neck begin. You'd be
slashing with a knife and you might just trim the guy as opposed to cutting his neck.
Did he manage to cut his throat? I don't know.
Okay, it is time for fact number three and that is my fact. My fact is we know who the most
significant male actor currently working in German speaking theatre is because he wears a special
best actor ring. The most significant male actor in the German speaking which is let's be honest
Germany and Austria. He must like walk into a party with you know like when someone just gets
engaged and they kind of have the hand in front of the face the whole time so everyone can see the
ring. He must do that his whole life. He must right and it's a real sparkly ring. It's got 28
diamonds on it so it's a real fashion piece and the story behind this is that it's called the
Ifland ring and this was in dedication to a great German actor from the late 18th century called
August Wilhelm Ifland who was a brilliant director dramatist. He was a theatre director. He sort of
ran most of the theatres in Germany at one point and the story goes because it is a bit of a murky
story that this ring was created and was to be handed on to the next person who the previous owner
deemed to be the most worthy actor working in German theatre that day. So you would receive
the ring upon the death of the previous owner of the ring and once you got this ring you had
three months to make your decision about who would be the next person to inherit it. Now they
wouldn't get it until you yourself died but they would then once you died open a vault where inside
on a bit of paper you will have written who you think that your successor is and they get given the
ring. But what happens if you're one of those actors who has a couple of really good movies at
the start like who's the guy who we talked about the other week who became a wrestler who was in
Scream and Courtney Cox. David Arquette. Well if you're like David Arquette you're like well
what a great actor he is and then he goes downhill very quickly. You're right it's absolutely mad
that it's you pick the most significant person working within three months of you getting the
award when if you're young you might be living for decades. Yeah what if it was like Macaulay
Culkin for instance. Like they the guy got his ring let's pretend Macaulay Culkin is a German
but they got the ring and then they thought Home Alone and Home Alone 2 are killer movies he's the
best actor he obviously is in the world let's give it to him and then 30 years later you die and it's
just this guy who's living with Pete Doctey. But do they have a backup plan because if you get it
and it doesn't pass on until you die there you know you can't guarantee that you unless you pick
someone like Macaulay Culkin who was young then you can't guarantee that you'll outlive them.
Well it's like a list like a sort of um like a line of succession for if your choice isn't
available. It sometimes happens you're right so the the previous holder before the the current one
was Bruno Gantz who played Hitler in Downfall that was maybe his most famous role in the English
speaking world and he intended an act called Gert Wost to get it but Wost died in 2014 when Gantz
was still alive so he had to change his mind and and re-nominate and as a result he he nominated
the new family. Yeah and that's that's happened a few times by the way Gantz when we say Hitler in
Downfall for anyone who hasn't seen that movie you probably have seen a very iconic scene from it
because it's become one of the most memed movie scenes possible where the subtitles are changed
with Hitler having a meltdown if you can picture that great meme that's from that and that's from
the great uh most significant German actor of his time one person ago. You think that's what got
him the nomination it was the meme you're like this is just such an impact all around the world
but it has to be you. But I mean so you know that that has happened before Gantz had that happen
there was a guy called Albert Baserman who was given the ring in 1908 and he really didn't want it
and he named three successors and all of them died before he actually died himself so he thought it
was cursed and he wanted to give it away so he actually didn't nominate his successor it was
done by a team an Austrian team who decided who the next actor was but he was he was quite a cool
actor Baserman he was nominated for his role in an Alfred Hitchcock movie that was made in 1940
called Foreign Correspondent and during the filming he had to have his dialogue spelt out to him
phonetically because he spoke virtually no English so he was memorizing his lines from a
phonetic translation and he memorized them and delivered them so well he was nominated for best
supporting actor. That's very cool. Baserman tried to destroy the ring by throwing it into a fire.
It's a volcano. Well this is insane. It was at the funeral of the third person he'd nominated who
had subsequently died who was Alexander Moises I don't know how that's pronounced exactly but
the story goes that he threw it onto the coffin of Moises at the cremation and it was sinking into
the flames when the director of the Viennese theatre reached in and grabbed it and he said this
ring belongs with a living actor not a dead one so as a result there was a kind of a vote he gave
it to the Austrian you know federal theatre body and they had to they had to pick because he said
I'm not picking anyone more. It's so incredibly Lord of the Rings though and I also read that the
Ilford ring was one of a set of seven originally which definitely adds to this and then I started
looking into the Lord of the Rings I just found this um potential Aryan story I think it's not
completely it's well I'll tell you the story because I blew my mind and I hadn't heard it before
which is there is a ring um a place called the Vienn Hampshire it's a national trust property
and it's a matter of chunky gold ring it's so big it can only be worn on a gloved thumb it's
ginormous and it's inscribed with Latin that says "Sinicianus live well in God" so they found this
in the field in 1785 it's a ring it went in the display but then a few decades later they found
a um tablet a sighting gloss to show a little little way away and this one contained a tablet
which said that a Roman wanted to um let them know someone had stolen his ring and he wanted it back
and the tablet said "Among those who bear the name Sinicianus to none grant health until he brings
back the ring to the temple of Nodans" and the book that makes this really exciting is they
contacted a professor of Anglo-Saxon at Oxford University to help them work out who this god was
and that was one J.R.R. Tolkien which I thought was so cool so you can see that ring one of another
mysterious rings um at the national trust property although they do say it's not completely sure it
was connected to the tablet they were a long way away but the story if that's true sounds like it
sounds very good that's such a great lord of the rings connection and they do think of the of the
seven two do still exist so we've got the one that sits on the most significant actor's hand
and a second one is in a private collection but it's suggested that that's either been lost or
destroyed so we could be down to the last ring and someone tried to throw it into a fire and this
is definitely lord of the rings you know it's a shame I think Bassamon would have rather it had
burnt in that fire because the successor that they picked would have absolutely devastated him
because Bassamon was married to um his wife who was called Elsa and she was Jewish and during
the height of Nazism he was told that he would need to divorce her um if he wanted to continue
performing in Germany he said absolutely not and he and Elsa went away to Switzerland to live
instead um he was very against it so it would have killed him for the fact that the ring was
passed on to Werner Kraus who was part of what is seen as the worst propaganda movie that Nazi
Germany ever made about Jewish people uh that was the successor of the ring really just horrible
yeah actually you were just saying about Switzerland um and Andy said that basically
the only German speaking places are Germany and Austria well of course you did forget about
Switzerland oh no which is where Bruno Gantz is from who played Hitler he's Swiss and in
Switzerland they have their own ring they have the Heinz Reinhardt ring and that is for whoever's
the best Swiss actor and actually in 1991 Bruno Gantz won that as well so for a short amount of
time he had both the best actor in Switzerland ring and the best actor in Germany what
incredible oh my god yeah he wasn't you know he was in he was meant to be the lead role of pretty
woman he was meant to be Richard Geer what the Julia Roberts yeah sorry yeah i've been a very
different movie wasn't it Richard Geer court Hitler um but actually you know this guy that
i just mentioned the Nazi Kraus he actually tried to be the first person to give the ring to a lady
because he thought this shouldn't be just male dominated and the lady um that he wanted to give
it to was Alma Seidler who is a brilliant actor at the time and they said no because she was a woman
and so as a result since the 1970s a new ring has been created which is the Alma Seidler ring
which is given to the most significant female actor in German speaking theater and we're on
our third most significant actor as of this year to hold the ring yeah there's a suggestion that
jens hauser who's the current holder of the ifland ring might give it to a woman isn't
yeah he better do we don't know yeah he's really suggested he will so i hope he does because otherwise
that's just all talk isn't it yeah and actually the ring has been with a woman for the last few years
at least because jens hauser um apparently keeps it in his daughter's underwear draw does he for
safekeeping yeah it feels like a small victory for feminism it doesn't feel like safekeeping if
you've told everyone exactly where you keep it and you've put it in your poor daughter's bedroom
a 28 diamond ring can i just say for any for any criminals listening because i know you do
listen to this podcast um we know what you look like you've got that little beard going around
um for any criminals listening um he has moved it from the daughter's underwear draw now it's
not there anymore it's somewhere else well that's what you would say that's exactly what you would
say if you hadn't moved it from your daughter's underwear okay it is time for our final fact
to the show and that is james okay my fact this week is that countries can now send propaganda
to individual enemy soldiers on the front line by text message every time they turn on their phones
wow i'm bad and by countries i mean russia
although i suppose anyone could do it but this is an article in The Economist uh from the last
couple of weeks and it is about a thing called pinpoint propaganda uh and it is something that's
happening on the front between russia and ukraine and apparently a ukrainian soldier might turn on
their phone and they'll get a message saying who is robbing your family while you are paid pennies
waiting for your bullet that kind of thing i'm settling it's pretty direct then it's not subtly
saying hey have you maybe considered retraining i think in warfare probably direct is generally
the way to go well they really do go for it so this has been happening for a few years i think it
was 2017 at the first examples were received by ukrainian soldiers and they they said things like
they'll find your bodies when the snow melts or nobody needs your kids to become orphans and
they also they look like they're coming from your comrades sometimes which is very creepy uh yeah
except you could quickly ask them why'd you send me that weird thing about my wife and kids
i got one from you so i sent one back and this article basically was all about um how mobile
phones are a problem in warfare so for instance if you're a country and that you know you there's a
front in between you and another country and you want to know where soldiers are you can scan and
you can look for mobile phone signals and people might be told to turn the phone off um but there
was a quote by lieutenant colonel roovin habel um who is in charge of nato troops in lithuania and
he says that it's um just turning on your phone is like a fire in the dark it's basically it just
lights you up exactly where you are and they'll know where to attack that's so interesting is that's
like just like the equivalent isn't it a first world war having a glowing cigarette which can be
seen from a really long way away at night i guess interestingly though if you got a text message
you would report that to your superior and say we got to get out of here they know exactly where we
are yeah but what if you what if you're defending your own territory you can't then say we got to
get out of here yeah that's that's uh why i should not be put in charge of we can't do this commander
schreiber we just can't do it no no guys let's just get out of here they know where we are
they've heard about england we've got to go all of us now yeah but phones but phones are such a huge
security beach because yeah there's geo tagging on stuff the um the army had to deny a case recently
that somebody gave away information because someone on tinder was asking them too many questions
and they gave away information about planes they completely denied it and also there's things like
you know if you send a photo to somebody well that can be geo tagged even if even if you've
turned off the geo tagging if there's a timestamp on the photo and you can sort of tell by the light
you can sort of work out where you are in the world so you can also work out where trips are
moving so there's tons of these risks that sit on phones and obviously the really big one is um
location trackers and there was that really problematic story recently where fitness trackers
got well they didn't even get hacked they released a heat map showing where the people who use fitness
trackers were and a lot of them were in us bases abroad and a lot of them ran around their base
for their exercise so basically lit up all these areas in deserts and they're like oh wow wonder
what's there literally drawing a ring around the the base that's amazing wow well what if you were
smart what you would do is like you know in world war two they would um make fake cities wouldn't they
so they would set fires and put lights just outside the city so the bombers would come over and bomb
the wrong place what you would do is you get your soldiers to run a kilometer away in a shape a bit
like a military base and then trick them yes and then all call home with like sort of some elaborate
lighting setups it's a different time of day and like completely throw everyone off where you actually
are and what you're doing yeah um james you you got this fact from the economist didn't you and um I
was reading an article about propaganda in the economist might might very well have been the
same article this was an article about all the different terms that have emerged in modern day
related to propaganda so in russia for example there's a term which is propagandan which is
basically a propaganda condom it's an insult to journalists in russia who are elastic with the
truth and it's a portmanteau of of propaganda and the russian word for condom which is sort of
derived from the english word for condom but it's gandon so propaganda and gandon together
propagandon so you would say of the journalists there who are just peddling basically state
propaganda that they are a propagandon the propaganda condom wait are they the they the condom
or are they the they're the condom so what what is the penis if they are the condom no no no it's
not really it's well i suppose the elastic with the truth is kind of a thing but it's like condom
is just like a silly insult that but they are the barrier between i guess the truth so the penis is
the penis or possibly the sperm cells are the truth and they're preventing the truth from getting
through to the people if you imagine like a sperm exhaust and then there's a barrier
who's the beard okay propagandon that's great yeah if you want to use that this is all come a very
very long way from early propaganda techniques i didn't know this thing which is that during the
first world war germany and britain both had their own propaganda newspapers which were in
french so if you see what i mean they were for people who spoke french and occupied belgium and
occupied france and and french-speaking prisoners of war so the german one was called the desert
then but the british one le courier de laire was a floating newspaper it was distributed
as a leaflet from hydrogen filled balloons and it was just released to drift across the battlefields
and slowly release bundles of papers as it went so there was a really clever fuse which burnt down
and every five minutes it burnt down another notch and it released another bundle yeah i think i think
they invented that because it used to be people dropping them out of planes and then two people
two people got caught with a lot of propaganda leaflets and then sentenced to hard labor and
they're like okay well this is risky so then they developed the balloons to just you'll do it without
people and they can completely deny it and be like oh it just floated into your land sorry there's
no one obviously operating it it's a bit more difficult to know exactly where your papers are
going to end up though right than if people are actually like if i'm a paper boy like i used to be
i couldn't use this as my technique for delivering newspapers in bolton could i know exactly and in
fact james you're so right because they had to have a weatherman in the early days to consult
and if the if the wind was blowing towards france you tied the newspaper and if it was
blowing towards germany you attached just out and out propaganda sheets for enemy soldiers so
they had to they had two different bundles and they had to pick which but what if you said the
wrong one's the wrong way and you like radicalized the wrong group you'd be like yeah problem we've
accidentally turned all the french into german soldiers the nightmare propaganda much older
even the 20th century during the civil war in england there was quite a lot of it against the
cromwells and actually a bit afterwards they were still really bad mouthing the cromwells after
the monarchy came back in and there was a book called the court and kitchen of elizabeth commonly
called jone cromwell the wife of the late usurper and this was a propaganda cookbook and it kind of
looked on the outside that it was jone cromwell's cooking recipes but actually in between all of
the recipes there was just a load of like sexual slander about the cromwells and what they used
to get up to and all that kind of stuff and stewart oren who is the cromwell museum's curator i read
this on atlas obscura he said that it would be a bit like today if you were to buy a cookery book
that was supposedly written by michelle obama but the first third of it was an essay by donald trump
saying how awful barack obama was oh don't give him ideas because trump will do that now but what's
so great though is that especially americans are very bad for this they're writing recipes where
there's like a really long backstory before they tell you the recipe so a lot people skip over those
sections it's probably the best place to hide something because everyone's like where's the
ingredients for brownies i don't want to know yeah you're right you need to you need to put the
propaganda in a place that someone's going to read so it's like first set your oven to
olive and cromwell was a shanger 270 degrees pick your moments yeah i i read a little bit about
that james and the other thing that i really like was that all the recipes in it were even they were
picked to target the cromwells they were quite basic recipes if i can put it that way designed to
say that all the cromwells would had been terribly common you know eel pies come on guys um sorry
that's not rhyming slang for eel pies but you know they were just kind of scuzzy recipes and not
for classic people i think that jela lawson does a recipe a day on twitter and i'm pretty sure the
day trump left her recipe of the day was bitter orange tart which is very well played i feel like
it would fit into this it's everywhere nice um joseph starlin of russian fame one point of starlin
fame i would say you've absolutely right he had a plane which was used pretty much solely for
propaganda purposes it was called the maxim gorky named after the famous writer and um it was an
incredible machine it was one of the largest planes in the world in fact in the 1930s it was
the largest plane in the world there were only two built for that specific model and get this it had
a cinema on board a library it was exclusively used for propaganda this plane well no no it seems
like it was often used for watching movies as well and reading books we don't know what movies
were played and we don't know what books you could borrow from the library but no come on andy right so
starlin doesn't need the propaganda you're not going to talk starlin into going for communism
by playing him a video you need to get the propaganda to the people outside the plane
okay i'd say 60 to 70 percent of its function was for propaganda it had some leisure center
facilities attached it also had its own leaflet printing and dropping capacity so it could print
them in the air pretty cool and it also had a this is what i read it had a giant radio attached to it
so it could just blare out propaganda as it flew overhead how long was this plane flying
it did fly pretty low because it did these cool flying exercises and that actually tragically led
to it crashing because it was flying with several other planes tiny ones which were designed to
point out how big the maxim gulfy was and then you know they would do cool maneuvers around it
and unfortunately one of them crashed into it and then it crashed that is terrible but the idea of
having really tiny planes next to your plane to make it look bigger is quite amazing it's like
those crabs that stand next to the ones with small claws to make their claws look bigger but
like you know have you guys heard of the sexual deviance pamphlets get out of them dad i've been
riding them for five years who made you the head of hr at qi i don't have to answer these questions
these are these reviews during world war two and it was basically one of the
ways to promote propaganda and change the mood of soldiers is that you would suggest that the
wives and partners and and husbands and so on of people back home were sleeping with other people
so yeah so you know one batch was dropped on the french front which had images of british soldiers
taking advantage of all the french women while they were there so they'd suddenly be like those
british bastards and then other leaflets had the french draft dodgers doing the same thing but to
french women while you know the hard working soldiers were out there they weren't the actual
that you know it wasn't the actual people right it was imagine a leaflet with your wife
darling that could be anyone's exhaust
okay that's it that is all of our facts thank you so much for listening if you'd like to
get in contact with any of us about the things that we have said over the course of this podcast
we can be found on our twitter accounts i'm on at schreiberland andy at andrew hunter m
james at james harkin and an at miller underscore and and you can also get us on our group account
which is at no such thing or you can go to our website no such thing as a fish dot com all of
our previous episodes are there do check them out go and check out our tour dates our 2021 tour
dates we are back on the road see if we're coming to a town near you and come see us live and also
most importantly get and new book mickey and the trouble with malls it's out now you can buy it in
all good bookshops as well as online it's part of the mickey and the animal spy series guaranteed
absolutely no honey traps in the book at all it is absolutely brilliant get it now all right guys
we'll be back again next week with another episode we'll see you then goodbye